7.2 Unreinforced Masonry
Component Types and
Behavior Modes

7.2.1 Non-Wall Components
For the procedures in this document, structural systems
are subdivided into elements, which are further
subdivided into components that can be related to
specific modes of behavior during seismic shaking.
Components within URM bearing wall buildings
include parapets, appendages, wall-diaphragm ties,
diaphragms, and walls. The focus of this document is
in-plane wall behavior modes. For other building types,
such as concrete wall buildings, earthquake damage is
primarily related to the in-plane behavior of the wall or
displacement incompatibility between the walls and
other elements. For URM bearing wall buildings,
however, other elements and components figure
prominently in observations of actual damage. In many
cases, non-wall component damage may occur before
in-plane damage to the wall becomes significant. These
other features and their common behavior modes are
discussed briefly below. The remainder of the document
focuses on wall elements and components.

Parapets: These short extensions of walls above the
roof typically occur at the perimeter of the buildings
and are primarily present for fire safety or aesthetic
reasons. As originally constructed, they are not braced
back to the roof and are thus susceptible to brittle
flexural out-of-plane failure (see Figures 7-1 and 7-2).
Braced parapets typically fail at the connections
between the parapet and the brace (see wall-diaphragm
tie failures for similar examples).
Appendages: This category includes veneer, cornices,
friezes, pediments, dentils, brackets, statuary, and
finials—in short, any minor masonry feature that is
susceptible to falling. Damage may result from
excessive accelerations of appendages and
deformations that cause connection failures between the
appendage and the structure; delamination of veneer
can result from missing or inadequate ties; deformation
incompatibility between the appendage and structure
can cause cracking and spalling; and pounding against
adjacent buildings can lead to localized falling hazards
(Figures 7-3 and 7-4).
Wall-Diaphragm Ties: In the United States, wall-to-
diaphragm ties in existing URM buildings are generally
limited to low-strength tension connections called
government anchors” or “dog anchors,” in which one
end of a steel bar is embedded one wythe in from the
outer face of the wall and the other end is hammered
into the side of a wood joist. These ties typically occur
where joists bear on the walls, not where they are
parallel to the walls. Wall-diaphragm separation due to
inadequate or missing tension ties can lead to out-of-
lane failures of walls; missing shear ties can lead to the

diaphragm sliding along the in-plane walls and then
pushing against the walls perpendicular to the
movement, resulting in corner damage to the walls (see
Figures 7-5, 7-6 and 7-7). In rehabilitated buildings, a
variety of tie failures have been observed, including
bond failures between the masonry and the cementitious
grout used in older drilled dowel connections, cone
failures due to shallow embedment and/or weak
masonry, pullthrough of through-plated anchors, and
bed-joint sliding near ties. Wall-diaphragm failures are
often associated with thin walls (such as two-wythe
walls at upper stories), poor mortar conditions, and lack
of sufficient overburden pressure.
Floor and Roof Diaphragms: Three categories of
diaphragms can be identified: rigid concrete slab
diaphragms, flexible wood and metal diaphragms, and
intermediate systems such as hollow concrete planks
and brick and HCT arches spanning between steel
beams. In flexible diaphragms, excessive deflections
can lead to out-of-plane wall damage. Hollow concrete
plank systems may lack adequate interconnections to
function as a continuous load path. Brick and HCT arch
systems may be susceptible to vertical failure if beams
separate locally. See Figure 7-8 for diagrams of some of
the diaphragm types. Rigid concrete diaphragms are
generally not significantly damaged or the source of
damage to other elements in URM bearing wall
buildings, but they do affect the dynamic behavior of
the building.
Table 7-1 summarizes behavior modes for non-wall
URM elements, providing the source of the deficiency,
type of damage, and intensity of ground shaking usually
required to produce the damage. The intensity of
ground shaking is a qualitative judgment based on
actual earthquake reconnaissance and damage
collection efforts. Individual buildings may respond in a
different manner. Even though some types of damage
do not generally lead to collapse, they can nonetheless
endanger life safety either within the building or around
the perimeter due to localized falling hazards. A simple
example is an exterior parapet failure, which rarely
leads to building collapse, but still poses a risk to
pedestrians adjacent to the wall. Damage to non-URM
wall elements is typically brittle or force-controlled,
and it often does not affect the overall force-
displacement relationship for the building. The
component guides in this volume focus on wall damage.
For non-URM wall elements that can affect the overall
force-displacement relationship, such as wall-
diaphragm ties, it is important to include their behavior
and characteristics in modeling efforts.

7.2.2 Wall Components
URM wall elements can be subdivided into five
Component Types as shown in Figure 7-9, based on the
mode of inelastic behavior. Figure 7-9 also shows some
of the common behavior modes. The majority of modes
relate to in-plane damage, but out-of-plane damage can
occur as well in each of the systems, often in
combination with in-plane damage. The five component
types are described below.
URM1: Solid cantilever walls. Such walls are typically
found adjacent to other buildings or on alleys, and they
act as cantilevers up from the foundation.
URM2: This component is a weak pier in a perforated
wall. In this system, inelastic deformation occurs in the
piers.
URM3: This component is a weak spandrel in a
erforated wall. Inelastic deformation occurs first in the
pandrels, which may create multistory piers similar to
URM1 or URM2 and then lead to inelastic deformation
nd damage in the piers.
URM4: This component is a strong spandrel in a weak
ier-strong spandrel mechanism. By definition, it
hould not suffer damage, and it is not discussed further
n the report.
URM5: Perforated wall with panel zone weak joints.
nelastic deformation occurs in the region where the
ier and spandrel intersect. Such damage is not
bserved generally in experimental tests, nor is it seen
n actual earthquakes, except at outer piers of upper
tories. In this document, such damage is considered a
ase of corner damage and, when caused by in-plane
emands, is addressed as part of the URM3 spandrel
rovisions.
Table 7-2 summarizes behavior types for URM wall
omponents identified above. The table provides an

indication of the ductility associated with a behavior
mode, and the frequency with which such modes are
observed. There are several categories for frequency of
occurrence: “common in field” means that the mode has
been frequently observed in earthquakes, even those of
moderate size; “possible” means that the mode may not
be explicitly documented in the literature, but it seems
reasonable to assume it has occurred or will occur in
earthquakes; “seen in experiments” means that such
modes have been reported in experiments and may have
occurred in some earthquakes; “theoretical” means that
the mode, while theoretically possible, has not been
widely reported in the literature, if at all. “Unlikely”
means that, even though a mode has been reported for
another component, it is unlikely to occur in the
component under consideration. The modes listed in
Table 7-2 are described in greater detail in the following
sections. Component Guides have been developed for
the damage resulting from the common modes and are
shaded in Table 7-2; the designations such as
“URM2A” refer to a specific guide.

7.2.3 Foundation Rocking
Rocking of a wall and its foundation on the supporting
oil has been observed in the field. Though recognized
s a potentially favorable mode of nonlinear response
nd a source of damping rather than significant damage,
xcessive rocking could theoretically lead to some
nstability and nonstructural damage in the
uperstructure, particularly if various walls rock out-of-
hase or elements attached to the walls cannot tolerate
he wall drift. See FEMA 273 and ATC-40 for an
valuation methodology for foundation rocking.

7.2.4 Wall-Pier Rocking
n the wall-pier rocking behavior mode, after flexural
racking develops at the heel, the wall or pier acts as a
igid body rotating about the toe. The rocking mode
ypically occurs when material shear capacity is high,
iers are slender, and compressive stress is low. Post-
racking deformations can be large and relatively stable
or many cycles. The ultimate limit state and the
eflection at which it occurs are not well defined by the
esearch, but three possible damage types can occur: in-

plane overturning, gradual degradation and softening of
the pier, and excessive out-of-plane residual
displacements (“walking”) of the pier, leading to
instability.
The strength and displacement capacities of an element
in rocking are based on FEMA 273, where the “d” drift
value of 0.4h /L was established. Currently available
experimental results are insufficient to determine the
relative influence of number of cycles, drift, and
ductility on rocking degradation. In the field, it is often
difficult to find evidence of rocking, because the cracks
close at the completion of shaking. However, horizontal
cracks at the top and bottom of piers have been
observed, particularly as pointing mortar spalls.

7.2.5 Bed-Joint Sliding
In this type of behavior, sliding occurs on bed joints.
Commonly observed both in the field and in
experimental tests, there are two basic forms: sliding on
a horizontal plane, and a stair-stepped diagonal crack
where the head joints open and close to allow for
movement on the bed joint. See Figure 7-10 for an
example of typical stair-stepped bed-joint sliding
observed in the field. Pure bed-joint sliding is a ductile
mode with significant hysteretic energy dissipation
capability. If sliding continues in the absence of one of
the less-ductile modes noted in the sections that follow,
then gradual degradation of the cracking region occurs
until instability is reached. Theoretically possible, but
not widely reported, is the case of stair-stepped
cracking in which sliding goes so far that an upper brick
slides off a lower brick.
The strength and displacement capacities (in shear) for
bed-joint sliding are based on FEMA 273, which uses a
Mohr-Coulomb model originally developed as part of
the ABK research. A Mohr-Coulomb model includes a
bond and friction component. There are many
uncertainties in this model, in relating the in-situ testing
to the model, and in the in-situ testing itself. The FEMA
73 equation for shear capacity is:
V = v A = A [0.75(0.75v +P /A )]/1.5 (7-1)
where:
v = the average test value from in-place testing
te
P = the expected gravity compressive force
CE
A = the area of net mortared/grouted section.
n
The model was calibrated with limited empirical tests
using brick units, which resulted in the first 0.75
coefficient. Calibrations for other types of masonry
such as ungrouted CMU or HCT have not been done.
The model is most appropriate for estimating strength
before cracking; after cracking the bond capacity will
be eroded, and the strength is likely to be based on only
the friction portion of the equation. Significant strength
degradation has been observed in experiments at drifts
of 0.3-0.4% which are likely to correspond to complete
erosion of bond capacity. See Sections 7.3 and FEMA
307 for the implications of strength degradation due to
sliding.
The v value representing bond strength is derived from
te
the average of the individual push test values, v ,
to
adjusted for dead load by the equation:
v = V /A - p , (7-2)
to test b D+L
where:
V = the test value
test
A = the net mortared area of the bed joints
above and below the test
p = the estimated gravity stress at the test loca-
tion.
A does not include the potential resistance of the collar
joint; the influence of collar-joint fill is applied later to
the v equation with the second 0.75 factor. This factor
is waived if collar-joint fill is not present. While this
simplifies the data reduction, it is less accurate than
addressing the effect of fill in the collar joint at the test
location itself. In many instances, it is difficult to
determine the extent of the collar-joint fill. It can also
be difficult to determine the actual gravity stress at a
test location in walls with irregular openings. In some
cases, flat-jack testing can be used to estimate gravity
stresses. In FEMA 273, a 100 psi limit is set on v ;
although such a limit may be appropriate for design
purposes, it is inappropriate for evaluating actual
damage. The 1.5 factor in the v equation is to relate the
average shear of V/A to the critical shear value of 1.5
V/A , as derived from a parabolic distribution of shear
in a rectangular section. ABK (1984) indicates that the
1.5 factor may overestimate the critical shear in long
walls without openings.
Finally, the in-place push test has a number of
uncertainties. Experience has shown that test results can
vary substantially within the same masonry class, with
coefficients of variation of 0.30 or more when the
required number of tests are performed. This may be
due to actual material variations, but it is also probably
due in part to the uncertainty in determining when
“either a crack can be seen or slip occurs”—the
governing criteria in UBC Standard 21-6 (ICBO, 1994)
for determining the test load, V . Alternatives have
been proposed to define V as the load occurring when
the load-deflection curve stiffness is reduced to a
certain percentage of the initial stiffness, or more
simply, when a certain threshold deflection is reached.

7.2.6 Bed-Joint Sliding at Wall Base
Observed in experiments, this mode is a variation of
bed-joint sliding in which the sliding occurs on the
surface where the URM wall meets the foundation.
Strength and displacement capacities are assumed to be
similar to bed-joint sliding as described in
Section 7.2.5.

7.2.7 Spandrel-Joint Sliding
Commonly observed in the field in running bond
masonry, this form of bed-joint sliding in the ends of the
spandrel resembles interlocked fingers pulling apart,
and it occurs when the in-plane moment capacity of the
spandrel is reached, but before the shear capacity of the
spandrel is reached. This mode can be relatively ductile
and can allow for significant drift, provided a reliable
lintel is present. As the spandrel displaces, the nonlinear
mechanism of response may move to other portions of
the wall such as the piers.
The strength and displacement capacity are based on a
modified version of the bed-joint sliding equation in
FEMA 273. See Section 7.3 for details.

7.2.8 Rocking/Toe Crushing
This sequence of damage occurs when rocking (see
Section 7.2.4) continues for several cycles, followed by
n abrupt loss of capacity occurs as the toe crushes.
Specimen W3 of Abrams and Shah (1992) is an
xample of such a phenomenon.
There is insufficient testing to determine parameters
hat would allow for an analytical determination of
when rocking will degenerate into toe crushing.
ntuitively, piers with higher axial stress and those
ubjected to higher drift levels and repeated cycles
would be more likely to experience toe crushing.
Because of the lack of data, this behavior is combined
in this document with typical rocking behavior, and
rocking capacity is set conservatively in FEMA 273.

7.2.9 Flexural Cracking/Toe
Crushing/Bed Joint Sliding
In this sequence of behavior, flexural cracking occurs at
the heel, but rocking does not begin. Instead, shear is
redistributed to the toe, seismic forces increase, and a
compression failure occurs in the toe. Diagonal cracks
form, oriented toward the corners. Initial toe crushing is
followed immediately by the ultimate limit state of bed-
joint sliding.
This sequence was observed in Specimens W1, W2, and
W3 of Manzouri et al. (1995). Initial capacity appears to
be close to the FEMA 273 equation for toe crushing
with a final capacity close to the frictional strength of
the mortar. Under repeated cyclic loading, the toes may
eventually deteriorate to the point of vertical instability.
See FEMA 307 for commentary on this mode.

7.2.10 Flexural Cracking/Diagonal
Tension
In this mode of behavior, flexural racking occurs at the
heel, but not rocking. Shear is redistributed to the toe,
seismic forces increase, a diagonal tension crack
develops, and capacity can be rapidly lost. Cracking
typically occurs in the units as well as the joints. See
Section 7.2.14 for more details.
Strength capacity is assumed to be the same as the
FEMA 273 equation for diagonal tension capacity;
displacements of approximately 0.5% have been
observed in tests.

7.2.11 Flexural Cracking/Toe Crushing
In this sequence of behavior, flexural cracking occurs at
the heel, but not rocking. Shear is redistributed to the
toe, the seismic load increases, and a compression
failure occurs in the toe. This type of behavior typically
occurs in stockier walls with L/h > 1.25. Based on
eff
laboratory testing of cantilever specimens, four steps
can usually be identified. First, flexural cracking
happens at the base of the wall, but it does not
propagate all the way across the wall. This can also
cause a series of horizontal cracks to form above the
heel. Second, sliding occurs on bed joints in the central
portion of the pier. Third, diagonal cracks form at the
toe of the wall. Finally, large cracks form at the upper
corners of the wall. Failure occurs when the triangular
portion of wall above the crack rotates off the crack or
the toe crushes so significantly that vertical load
carrying capability is compromised.
Testing is limited to five monotonic specimens in
Epperson and Abrams (1989), which all exhibited
similar behavior, and Specimen W2 in Abrams and
Shah (1992), which was tested with quasistatic
reversed-cyclic loading. The strength is well-predicted
by the FEMA 273 toe crushing equation. Toe crushing
is considered in FEMA 273 to be a force-controlled
mode, but moderate ductility was observed in Epperson
and Abrams (1989), with drift values at conclusion of
the test equal to 0.2-0.4%. In the Abrams and Shah
(1992) test, even higher drift appears to have been
achieved. Thus, some moderate degree of nonlinear
capacity is possible. As noted above, behavior is similar
to the Manzouri et al. (1995) tests, except that bed-joint
sliding at the base did not occur at higher drifts.

7.2.12 Spandrel-Unit Cracking
In this type of damage, the moment at the end of the
spandrel is not relieved by sliding, but instead causes
brittle vertical cracking though the masonry units.
Depending on the lintel construction, this can lead to a
local falling hazard. It also can alter the height of the
piers.
The cracked portion of the spandrel is assumed to lack
both shear and tensile capacity. As a result, only the
uncracked section is assumed to contribute to the
strength and displacement capacity. See Section 7.3 for
details.

7.2.13 Corner Damage
This form of damage is commonly observed at the
intersection of the roof and walls subjected to in-plane
and out-of-plane demands in moderate earthquakes. See
Figures 7-11 and 7-12 for a diagram and photo of this
damage type. Although not studied in experiments, it is
likely to result from a combination of any of three
possible causes:
• When a roof diaphragm without shear anchorage
moves parallel to the walls subjected to in-plane
demands, the walls subjected to out-of-plane
demands may be punched outward. The tensile
capacity of the wall (from the strength of the bed
joints) is exceeded locally, and the wall corner falls.
• Damage may be exacerbated by cracking resulting
from the horizontal spanning of the wall. In a
horizontal span, there is bending restraint at the ends
of the wall due to the returns around the corner. If
the resulting moment at the wall ends exceeds the
capacity, a vertical crack occurs at the corner.
For walls with openings near the corner, in-plane
demands force moments into the joint between the
outer pier at the top story and the adjacent spandrel.
The moment places tensile demands on the head and
bed joints at the pier/spandrel intersection, causing a
diagonal crack to form.
Capacities are difficult to identify for the first two
auses; the third is covered in a methodology developed
n Section 7.3.

7.2.14 Preemptive Diagonal Tension
n this behavior mode, a diagonal tension crack forms
without significant ductile response. Typical diagonal
ension cracking—resulting from strong mortar, weak
nits, and high compressive stress—can be identified
y diagonal cracks (“X” cracks) that propagate through
he units. In many cases, the cracking is sudden and
rittle, and vertical load capacity drops quickly. The
racks may then extend to the toe, and the triangles
bove and below the crack separate. In a few cases, the
oad drop may be more gradual with cracks increasing
n size and extent with each cycle.
A second form of diagonal tension cracking exists with
weak mortar, strong units, and low compressive stress,
when the cracks propagate in a stair-stepped manner in
ead and bed joints. In Specimen MA of Calvi and
Magenes (1994), this behavior was observed (Magenes,
997).
Capacity is based on the FEMA 273 equation for
iagonal tension. This equation requires calculation of
masonry tensile strength, but there is no direct test for
his value. As a substitute, the bed-joint mortar strength
s used. This strength value only applies to the mortar,
ot the masonry units. Thus, there is a great deal of
ncertainty in diagonal tension-strength calculations.

7.2.15 Preemptive Toe Crushing
n this form of damage, compression at the toe causes
rushing without significant ductile response, such as
ocking. There are no reported experimental
bservations of such behavior.
The FEMA 273 equation for toe crushing is used. Post-
crack displacement capacity is assumed to be negligible.

7.2.16 Out-of-Plane Flexural Response
Out-of-plane failures are common in URM buildings.
Usually they occur due to the lack of adequate wall ties
as discussed in Table 7-1. When floor and roof ties are
adequate, the wall may fail due to out-of-plane bending
between floor levels. One mode of failure observed in
experiments is rigid-body out-of-plane rocking
occurring on three cracks: one at the top of the wall, one
at the bottom, and one at midheight. The ultimate limit
state is that the walls rock too far and overturn.
Important variables identified by ABK (1984) and
Adham (1985) were the vertical stress on the wall, the
height-to-thickness ratio of the wall, and the input
velocity provided to the wall by the diaphragms. As
rocking increases, the mortar and masonry units at the
crack locations can degrade, and residual offsets can
occur at the crack planes.
ABK (1984) and Adham (1985) provide a graph, based
on ABK (1981c), showing the relationship between the
velocity at the top and bottom of the piers, the
overburden ratio of superimposed load over wall load,
and the height-to-thickness ratio. The graph indicates
that walls meeting the requirements have a “98%
probability of survival.” The authors did not provide
relationships between damage and spectral acceleration
or peak ground acceleration because input velocities
were found to be a better predictor of wall performance.
Therefore, it is difficult to relate damage to the spectral
accelerations and nonlinear static procedures used in
documents such as FEMA 273 for in-plane motions. As
a result, the prescriptive h/t ratio concept is retained in
this document.

7.2.17 Other Modes
A review of the literature provides a substantial number
of specimens that cannot be easily placed in the above
set of categories. Most common are tests that report
“diagonal cracking” but do not specify stair-stepping
bed-joint sliding, diagonal tension cracking, or
diagonally-oriented compressive splitting cracks.
In addition, given the geometric complexity and
material variation inherent in unreinforced masonry
walls, localized stress concentrations can develop that
are difficult to predict.
